recordings are in the public domain. For more information or to volunteer, please visit
James Version, Chapter 1. Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ, through the
of God. And Sophanes, our brother, unto the Church of God, which is at Corinth, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that in every place call upon the name
of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours. Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God,
which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in every thing ye are enriched by him in all utterance and
in all knowledge, even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you, so that ye come behind in
no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall also confirm you unto the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were
called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Now, I beseech you, brethren,
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment. For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the house of
Christ, that ye may know that there are contentions among you. Now, this I say, that every one of you
saith, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul
crucified for you, or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God that I baptized none of you,
but Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say that I had baptized in my own name. And I baptized also
the household of Stephanus. Besides, I know not whether I baptized any other. For Christ sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the gospel, not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ
should be made of none effect. For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness.
But unto us which are saved, it is the power of God. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise?
Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the
wisdom of this world? For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God,
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews require a
sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom. But we preach Christ, crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men,
and the weakness of God is stronger than men. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called. But God hath chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are despised
hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh
should glory in his presence, but of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom
and righteousness and sanctification and redemption, that according as it is written,
he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. And I, brethren, when I came to you,
came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.
For I determined not to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And I was
with you in weakness and in fear, and in much trembling, and my speech and my preaching was not
with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power,
that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world,
nor of the princes of this world that come to naught. But we speak the wisdom of God in a
history, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory,
which none of the princes of this world knew. For had they known it, they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory. But as it is written, I have not seen nor ear heard, neither have it entered
into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them that love him.
But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. For the Spirit searcheth all things,
yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man save the
spirit of man which is in him. Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.
Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which
man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.
But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him. Neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual
judgeeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. For who hath known the mind
of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ.
Reading by Simon Wainwright
of I Corinthians.
Reading by Simon Wainwright.
And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ.
I have fed you with milk and not with meat, for heather too ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are yet carnal.
For whereas there is among you envying and strife and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men?
For while one sayeth, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal?
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed?
Even as the Lord gave to every man, I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.
So then, neither is he that planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase.
Now, he that planteth and he that watereth are one, and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor, for we are laborers together with God.
Ye are God's husbandry, ye are God's building.
According to the grace of God which is given unto me as a wise master builder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon.
But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon, for other foundation can no man lay than that is laid which is Jesus Christ.
Now, if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.
If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.
If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy.
Which temple ye are? Let no man deceive himself.
If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it is written, he taketh the wise in their own craftiness.
And again the Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain. Therefore let no man
glory in men, for all things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life,
or death, or things present, or things to come. All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God.
Let a man sow account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.
Moreover, it is required in stewards that a man be found faithful. But with me it is a very small thing,
that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment, yea, I judge not mine own self.
For I know nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light
the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God.
And these things, brethren, I have in a figure, transferred to myself and to Apollos,
for your sakes, that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is written,
that no one of you be puffed up for one against another.
For who maketh thee to differ from another, and what hast thou that thou dost not receive?
Now, if thou dost receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hast not received it?
Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings. Without us, and I would to God,
ye did reign, that we also might reign with you. For I think that God have set forth us,
the apostles, last as it were appointed to death. For we are made a spectacle unto the world,
and to angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ.
We are weak, but ye are strong. Ye are honorable, but we are despised.
Even unto this present hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted,
and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working with our own hands.
Being reviled, we bless. Being persecuted, we suffer it. Being defamed, we entreat.
We are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you.
For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers.
For in Christ Jesus, I have begotten you through the gospel.
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me. For this cause have I sent unto you,
Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you
into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach everywhere in every church.
Now some are puffed up as though I would not come to you, but I will come to you shortly,
if the Lord will, and will know not the speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.
For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. What will ye? Shall I come unto you with
or in love, and in the spirit of meekness?
V It is reported commonly that there was fornication
and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his
father's wife. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that hath done this deed
might be taken away from among you. For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit,
have judged already as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed.
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit,
with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Your glorying is not good.
Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Purge out therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for
us. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice
and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. I wrote unto you in an epistle
not to company with fornicators, yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world,
or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters, for then must ye needs go out of the
world. But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother,
be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such an one know not to eat. For what have I to do, to judge them also that are without?
Do not ye judge them that are within? But them that are without, God judgeth. Therefore put
away from among yourselves that wicked person. Dare any of you, having a matter
against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints? Do we not know that
the saints shall judge the world? And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy
to judge the smallest matters? Know we not that we shall judge angels? How much more things that
pertain to this life? If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge
who are least esteemed in the church. I speak to your shame. Is it so that there is not a wise man
among you? No, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren. But brother goeth to law
with brother, and that before the unbelievers. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you,
because ye go to law one with another. Why do we not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer
yourselves to be defrauded? Nay, ye do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren. Know we not that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators,
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. All things
are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient. All things are lawful for me,
but I will not be brought under the power of Aene. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats,
but God shall destroy both it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord,
and the Lord for the body. And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us
by his own power. Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of Anharlot? God forbid. What? Know ye not that he
which is joined to Anharlot is one body? For two, saith he, shall be one flesh. But he that is
joined unto the Lord is one spirit. Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body,
but he that cometh fornication sinneth against his own body. What? Know ye not that your body is the
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye
are bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's.
March 2011
Of I Corinthians
Now, concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me,
it is good for a man not to touch a woman.
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife,
and let every woman have her own husband.
Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence,
and likewise also the wife unto the husband.
The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband,
and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.
Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time
that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer,
and come together again that Satan tempt you not for your incontancy.
But I speak this by permission and not of commandment,
for I would that all men were even as I myself.
But every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner and another after that.
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows,
it is good for them if they abide even as I,
but if they cannot contain, let them marry.
For it is better to marry than to burn, and unto the married I command.
Yet not I, but the Lord, let not the wife depart from her husband.
But, and if she depart, let her remain unmarried,
or be reconciled to her husband, and let not the husband put away his wife.
But to the rest speak I, not the Lord.
If any brother hath a wife that believeth not,
and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
And the woman which hath a husband that believeth not,
and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband.
Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy.
But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart.
A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases,
but God hath called us to peace.
For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?
Or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?
But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath called everyone,
so let him walk, and so ordain I in all churches.
Is any man called being circumcised?
Let him not become uncircumcised.
Is any called in uncircumcision?
Let him not be circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing.
But the keeping of the commandments of God,
let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.
Art thou called being a servant?
Care not for it, but if thou mayest be made free, use it rather.
For he that is called in the Lord being a servant is the Lord's free man.
Likewise also, he that is called being free is Christ's servant.
Ye are bought with a price.
Be not ye the servants of men.
Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God.
Now, concerning versions, I have no commandment of the Lord,
yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.
I suppose, therefore, that this is good for the present distress.
I say that it is good for a man so to be.
Art thou bound unto a wife?
Seek not to be loosed.
Art thou loosed from a wife?
Seek not a wife.
But, and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned.
And if aversion, marry, she hath not sinned.
Nevertheless, such shall have trouble in the flesh, but I spare you.
But, this I say, brethren, the time is short.
It remaineth that both they that have wives be as though they had none,
and they that weep as though they wept not,
and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not,
and they that buy as though they possessed not,
and they that use this world as not abusing it for the fashion of this world passeth away.
But I would have you without carefulness.
He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord,
how he may please the Lord.
But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world,
how he may please his wife.
There is difference also between a wife and a virgin.
The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord,
that she may be holy both in body and in spirit.
But she that is married careth for the things of the world,
how she may please her husband.
And this I speak for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon you,
but for that which is comely and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
But if any man think that he behaveeth himself uncumbly toward his virgin,
if she pass the flower of her age and need so require,
let him do what he will.
He sinneth not, let them marry.
Nevertheless, he that standeth steadfast in his heart,
having no necessity but hath power over his own will,
and hath so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin doeth well.
So then, he that giveth her in marriage doeth well,
but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth better.
The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth.
But if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will,
only in the Lord.
But she is happier if she so abide after my judgment,
and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.
Now, as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have knowledge.
Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifyeth.
And if any man think that he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing, yet as he ought to know.
But if any man love God, the same is known of him.
As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols,
we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one.
For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth,
as there be gods many, and lords many.
But to us there is but one God, the Father of whom are all things, and we in him,
and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.
Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge.
For some, with conscious of the idol, unto this hour eat it, as a thing offered unto an idol,
and their conscious being weak is defiled.
But me commendeth us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the better,
neither if we eat not are we the worse.
But take heed, lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block
to them that are weak.
For if any man see thee which hath knowledge sit at meat in the idol's temple,
shall not the conscious of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered
to idols.
And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died.
But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscious, ye sin against Christ.
Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth.
Lest I make my brother to offend.
Reading by Simon Wainwright.
of I Corinthians
Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?
Are not ye my work in the Lord?
If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless, I am to you,
for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.
Mine answer to them that do examine me is this.
Have we not power to eat and to drink?
Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles,
and as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas?
Or I only and Barnabas have not we power to forbear working?
Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges?
Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof?
Or who feedeth a flock and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
Say I these things as a man?
Or sayeth not the law the same also?
For it is written in the law of Moses,
Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn.
Doth God take care for oxen?
Or sayeth he it altogether for our sakes?
For our sakes, no doubt.
This is written that he that ploweth should plow in hope,
and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things,
is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?
If others be partakers of this power over you,
are not we rather, nevertheless,
we have not used this power but suffer all things,
lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ?
Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things
live of the things of the temple,
and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?
Even so have the Lord ordained
that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.
But I have used none of these things,
neither have I written these things,
that it should be so done unto me.
For it were better for me to die
than that any man should make my glorying void.
For though I preach the gospel,
I have nothing to glory of.
For necessity is laid upon me,
yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel.
For if I do this thing willingly,
I have a reward.
But if against my will,
a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.
What is my reward then?
Verily, that when I preach the gospel,
I may make the gospel of Christ without charge,
that I abuse not my power in the gospel.
For though I be free from all men,
yet have I made myself servant unto all,
that I might gain the more.
And unto the Jews I became as a Jew,
that I might gain the Jews
to them that are under the law,
as under the law,
that I might gain them that are under the law,
to them that are without law as without law,
being not without law to God,
but under the law to Christ,
that I might gain them that are without law.
To the weak became I as weak,
that I might gain the weak.
I am made all things to all men,
that I might by all means save some.
And this I do for the gospel's sake,
that I might be partaker thereof with you.
Know ye not that they which run in a race run all,
but one receiveth the prize?
So run, that ye may obtain.
And every man that striveth for the mastery
is temperate in all things.
Now, they do it to obtain a corruptible crown,
but we in incorruptible.
I therefore so run,
not as uncertainly,
so fight I,
not as one that beateth the air.
But I keep under my body
and bring it into subjection,
lest that by any means,
when I have preached to others,
I myself should be a cast away.
Moreover, brethren,
I would not that ye should be ignorant
how that all our fathers were under the cloud
and all passed through the sea,
and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud
and in the sea,
and did all eat the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink of the same spiritual drink,
for they drank of that spiritual rock
that followed them,
and that rock was Christ.
But with many of them God was not well pleased,
for they were overthrown in the wilderness.
Now, these things were our examples
to the intent we should not lust after evil things,
as they also lusted.
Neither be ye idolers,
as were some of them,
as it is written,
the people sat down to eat and drink
and rose up to play.
Neither let us commit fornication
as some of them committed
and fell in one day,
three in twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ,
as some of them also tempted
and were destroyed of serpents.
Neither murmur ye,
as some of them also murmured
and were destroyed of the destroyer.
Now, all these things happened unto them
for in samples,
and they are written for our admonition
upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Wherefore, let him that thinketh he standeth
take heed, lest he fall.
There hath no temptation taken you,
but such as is common to man.
But God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able.
But will with the temptation
also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it.
Wherefore, my dearly beloved,
flee from idol-tree.
I speak as to wise men,
judge ye what I say.
The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ?
The bread which we break,
is it not the communion
of the body of Christ?
For we being many are one bread
and one body,
for we are all partakers of
that one bread.
Behold, Israel after the flesh,
are not they which eat
of the sacrifices partaker
of the altar?
What say I then,
that the idol is anything,
or that which is offered
in sacrifice to idols is anything?
But I say, that the things
which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice to devils
and not to God.
And I would not that ye
should have fellowship
with devils.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord
and the cup of devils.
Ye cannot be partakers
of the Lord's table
and of the table of devils.
Do we provoke the Lord
to jealousy?
Are we stronger than he?
All things are lawful for me,
but all things are not expedient.
but all things edified not.
Let no man seek his own,
but every man another's wealth.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles
that eat,
asking no question for conscious sake.
For the earth is the Lord's
and the fullness thereof.
If any of them that believe not
bid you to a feast
and ye be disposed to go,
whatsoever is set before you eat,
asking no question for conscious sake.
But if any man say unto you,
this is offered in sacrifice unto idols,
eat not, for his sake that showed it,
and for conscious sake.
For the earth is the Lord's
and the fullness thereof.
Conscious I say,
not thine own, but of the other.
For why is my liberty judged
of another man's conscious?
For if I by grace be a partaker,
why am I evil spoken of
for that for which I give thanks?
Whether therefore ye eat or drink
or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God.
Give none offense,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles,
nor to the Church of God.
Even as I please all men in all things,
not seeking mine own,
profit but the profit of many,
that they may be saved.
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.
Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances,
as I have delivered them to you.
But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman
is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonoreth his head.
But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered, dishonoreth her head.
For that is even all one, as if she were shaven.
For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn.
But if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.
For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the image and glory of
God, but the woman is the glory of the man.
For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.
Neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man.
For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of the angels.
Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man in
the Lord.
For as the woman is of the man, even so the man also by the woman, but all things of God.
Judge in yourselves, is it comely that a woman pray into God uncovered?
Doth not even nature itself teach you that if a man have long hair it is a shame to him?
But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her, for her hair is given her for a covering.
But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches
of God.
Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not, that ye come together not for the
better, but for the worse.
For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear that there be divisions
among you, and I partly believe it.
For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest
among you.
When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's supper.
For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper, and one is hungry, and another
is drunken.
What have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?
Or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not?
What shall I say to you?
Shall I praise you in this?
I praise you not.
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus,
the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread.
And when he had given thanks, he break it, and said, Take eat.
This is my body, which is broken for you.
This do in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also, he took the cup when he had supped, saying, This cup is the
New Testament in my blood.
This do ye as oft as ye drink it in remembrance of me.
For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till
he come.
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily shall
be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.
For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to himself,
not discerning the Lord's body.
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.
For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world.
Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.
And if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto condemnation.
And the rest I will set in order when I come.
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant.
Ye know that ye were Gentiles carried away unto these dumb idols, even as ye were led.
Wherefore I give you to understand that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth
Jesus accursed, and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.
And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.
And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all.
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge
by the same Spirit, to another faith by the same Spirit, to another the gifts of healing
by the same Spirit, to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another
discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation
of tongues.
But all these worketh that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every man severally
as he will.
For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body being
many are one body, so also is Christ.
For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,
whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
For the body is not one member, but many.
If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, Is it therefore
not of the body?
And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body, Is it therefore
If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing?
If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?
But now hath God set the members, every one of them, in the body, as it hath pleased him.
And if they were all one member, where were the body?
But now are they many members, yet but one body.
And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the head to the
feet, I have no need of you.
Nay, much more those members of the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary.
And those members of the body which we think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow
more abundant honour.
And our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.
For our comely parts have no need, but God hath tempered the body together, having given
more abundant honour to that part which lacked.
That there should be no schism in the body, but that the members should have the same
care one for another.
And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it.
Or when member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.
And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers,
after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
Are all apostles?
Are all prophets?
Are all teachers?
Are all workers of miracles?
Have all the gifts of healing?
Do all speak with tongues?
Do all interpret?
But covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent way.
13.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become
brass, or a tinkling symbol. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though
I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long,
and is kind. Charity envyeth not. Charity vaunteth not itself, it is not puffed up, doth not behave
itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil. Rejoiceth
not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth. Beareth all things, believeth all things,
hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charity never faileth, but whether there be prophecies,
they shall fail, whether there be tongues, they shall cease, whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part, but when that which is perfect
is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child,
I understood as a child, I thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put away childish things.
For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I shall
know even as also I am known. And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is charity
Follow after charity and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy. For he that
speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God. For no man understandeth him,
howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries. But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification
and exhortation and comfort. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifyeth himself,
but he that prophesieth edifyeth the church. I would that ye all speak with tongues,
but rather that ye prophesied. For greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
tongues, except he interpret that the church may receive edifying. Now brethren, if I come unto you
speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation
or by knowledge or by prophesying or by doctrine? And even things without life giving sound,
whether pipe or harp, except they have a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be
known what is piped or harped? If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to
the battle? So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood,
how shall it be known what is spoken? For ye shall speak into the air. There are, it may be,
so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without signification. Therefore,
if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian,
and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me. Even so ye, for as much as ye are
zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.
Wherefore, let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he may interpret. For if I pray
in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then?
I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. I will sing with
the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit,
how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest? For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other
is not edified. I thank my God I speak with tongues more than ye all. Yet in the church
I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also,
than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Brethren, be not children in understanding,
howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men. In the law it is written,
with men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people, and yet for all that
will they not hear me, saith the Lord. Wherefore, tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe,
but to them that believe not. But prophesying serveth not for them that believe not,
but for them which believe. If therefore the whole church be come together into one place,
and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned or unbelievers,
will they not say that ye are mad? But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth
not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face he will worship God,
and report that God is in you of a truth. How is it then, brethren, when ye come together,
every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation,
hath an interpretation? Let all things be done unto edifying. If any man speak in an unknown tongue,
let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course, and let one interpret.
But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church, and let him speak to
himself and to God. Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. If anything be
veiled to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace. For ye may all prophesy one by one
that all may learn, and all may be comforted. And the spirits of the prophets are subject
to the prophets. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of
the saints. Let your women keep silence in the churches, for it is not permitted unto them to
speak. But they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law. And if they will learn
anything, let them ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.
What, came the word of God out from you, or came it unto you only? If any man think himself to be a
prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are the commandments
of the Lord. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy,
and forbid not to speak with tongues. Let all things be done decently and in order.
15 I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, which also ye have received, and
wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto
you, unless ye have believed in vain.
For I delivered unto you, first of all, that which I also received, how that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose again
the third day according to the Scriptures, and that He was seen of Cephas, then of the
After that, He was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part
remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.
After that, He was seen of James, then of all the apostles.
And last of all, He was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.
For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because
I persecuted the Church of God.
But by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace which was bestowed upon me was not
in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God
which was with me.
Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed.
Now if Christ be preached, that He rose from the dead, how say some among you, that there
is no resurrection of the dead?
But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen.
And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.
Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God, because we have testified of God that He raised
up Christ, whom He raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not.
For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised.
And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins.
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, then we are of all men most miserable.
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.
For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
But every man in his own order, Christ the firstfruits, afterward they that are Christ's
at his coming.
Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father, when
he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power.
For he must reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.
For he hath put all things under his feet.
But when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is accepted which
did put all things under him.
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject
unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.
Else what shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all?
Why are they then baptized for the dead?
And why stand we in jeopardy every hour?
I protest by your rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageeth it me,
if the dead rise not?
Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.
Be not deceived, evil communications corrupt good manners.
Awake to righteousness and sin not.
For some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame.
But some man will say, How are the dead raised up, and with what body do they come?
Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die.
And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it
may chance of wheat or of some other grain.
But God giveth it a body, as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body.
All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts,
another of fishes, and another of birds.
There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial.
But the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars,
for one star differeth from another star in glory.
So also is the resurrection of the dead.
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption.
It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory.
It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.
It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.
There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.
And so it is written, the first man Adam was made a living soul,
the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.
Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural,
and afterward that which is spiritual.
The first man is of the earth, earthy, the second man is the Lord from heaven.
As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy, and as is the heavenly,
such are they also that are heavenly.
And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.
Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God,
neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.
Behold, I show you a mystery.
We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump.
For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall have put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory.
O death, where is thy sting?
O grave, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
16. Now concerning the collection for the saints,
as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye.
Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store,
as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.
And when I come, whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters,
them will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem.
And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me.
Now I shall come unto you when I shall pass through Macedonia,
for I do pass through Macedonia.
And it may be that I will abide, yea, in winter with you,
that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go.
For I will not see you now by the way,
but I trust to tarry a while with you, if the Lord permit.
But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost,
for a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries.
Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear,
for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do.
Let no man therefore despise him, but conduct him forth in peace,
that he may come unto me, for I look for him with the brethren.
As touching our brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto you with the brethren,
but his will was not at all to come at this time.
But he will come when he shall have convenient time.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.
Let all your things be done with charity.
I beseech you, brethren, ye know the house of Stephanas,
that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the
ministry of the saints, that ye submit yourselves unto such,
and to every one that helpeth with us and laboreth.
I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus,
for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied,
for they have refreshed my spirit and yours, therefore acknowledge ye them that are such.
The churches of Asia salute you, Aquila and Percilla salute you much in the Lord,
with the church that is in their house.
All the brethren greet you, greet ye one another with an holy kiss.
The salutation of me, Paul, with mine own hand.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Marinatha.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.